## Political factors
### Conflict and development

Development depends on peace. The centrality of peace and stability as a foundation for development has been stressed upon by the UN

**How can peace and stability promote development? –**

- Developed countries are often peaceful and stable, meaning there is relatively little violence or conflict in these states
- A stable government is necessary for appropriate decision making and employing policies that are beneficial for development
- Stability also leads to inflows of FDI, as people seek security for their assets.

**How can peace and stability inhibit development? –**

- Conflicts destroy the social, economic, political and cultural fabric of society through effects such as loss of life, forced migration, damage to energy infrastructure (which may force countries to switch to less sustainable alternatives)
- Instability and war deprives governments the ability to provide relief, as most funds are allocated to military or policing. Wars also increase vulnerability to famine.
- Erodes trust and attractiveness of investment destinations and trade partners (capital flight) – both of which are an intrinsic part of economic growth/development
- Proven that poverty continues to persist in countries plagued by violence
### Governance: accountability and transparency

- Much of a country’s development is related to matters concerning governance (i.e stability, accountability, transparency, legal frameworks).
- This means the actions of government officials can be reviewed by the public or an independent body. 
- The purpose here is to prevent corrupt government officials from personally benefiting from their office.
- Developed states also have a powerful and independent judicial system that impartially reviews the legality of the government’s actions. 
- A state that does not have an independent judiciary may be more vulnerable to corruption.

**How can accountability and transparency promote development? –**

- Governments and leaders who have a positive approach towards an accountable and transparent system with a strong and efficient bureaucracy are known to have an accelerated growth rate
- High levels of government transparency can be associated with low corruption levels in the public sector. This means that the population can trust that the government and public sector act in their best interests. Tax revenue will most likely be reallocated efficiently, improving infrastructure, healthcare, education and other desirable services. This will likely lead to improvements in development 

**How can accountability and transparency inhibit development? –**

- Low levels of government transparency can be associated with high corruption levels in the public sector. Corruption erodes the trust people have in the public sector to act and represent their best interests. It misallocates taxes and other revenues leading to little or no improvement in infrastructure, healthcare or education. 
- Lack of an independent judiciary means that courts will likely not act impartially, making unfair or unjust decisions due to influence by outside sources
## Economic factors
### Access to resources

Different countries have different supplies of natural resources. Having access to valuable resources is considered necessary for economic development. Having a supply of valuable resources allows for economic growth since they are typically exported to larger markets abroad

**How can access to resources promote development? –**

- Access to natural resources can help states advance in Rostow’s model of development, as developing states can export these natural resources and branch out into different sectors. 

**How can access to resources inhibit development? –**

- Although having natural resources is useful for creating economic growth, depending too much on exports can cause a country to be vulnerable to changes in the global economy. If prices of a country’s exports drop they may experience an economic recession
### Foreign Direct Investment

A foreign direct investment is an investment in the form of controlling ownership in a business in one country by an entity based in another country.

**How can FDI promote development? –**

- Developing countries can be rich in resources, but lack the needed infrastructure and technology to take advantage of them. These resources can bring about much needed revenue for the government to invest in education, healthcare and other services to improve the quality of life

**How can FDI inhibit development?**

- Much of the revenue they earn from extraction of resources is not invested in the developing country, but shared with stockholders back home.
- MNCs can face accusations of human rights abuses and other abuses of their power.
### Access to capital, credit and aid

Capital could be defined as a stock of wealth used to produce goods and services (physical, natural, human). Credit is an agreement under which a borrower receives something of value in the present and has to repay the same (with interest)

**How can access to capital, credit and aid promote development? –**

- Aid can prop up the process of development in various ways. External assistance in areas critical to human development (i.e food, education, health). 
- For a country that has been suffering, or is in the process of recovering from natural disasters or conflicts of any kind, aid is required to ensure relief and stability.
- Aid in areas such as the establishment of sound infrastructure facilities can help establish a solid foundation for industrialization and growth

**How can access to capital, credit and aid inhibit development? –**

- Aid could promote the tendency for states and governments to develop a pattern of reliance, even as it expunges the spirit of self-help, hard work and entrepreneurship.
- Aid can prove to be harmful when combined with poor governance – corruption and a lack of transparency. A corrupt government could swindle aid for private gain and become even stronger at the expense of the poor population
## Social factors
### Values, culture and traduction

The term culture includes a society’s or community’s value systems and beliefs. Since culture and traditions help shape and condition the values of ethics of society, they also have an impact on the social and economic aspects of their lives.

**How can values, cultures and traditions promote development? –**

- A culture clear of corrupt practices and with an ethos conducive to innovation, entrepreneurship, gender equality and racial harmony augments the attractiveness of a country as a destination for investments (FDI) as well as a favorable location for setting up operations for companies/institutions/organizations
- Culture could also be used to attract tourism – a major revenue earner for many states.

**How can values, cultures and traditions promote development? –**

- Trade union culture, strikes, loss of labour hours and a lack of discipline are all cultural attributes that deter both interest and investments in society (capital flight)
- Some suggest that religion is a limiting factor on development while others believe it improves productivity
### Gender

Gender roles are integral to culture. Some societies adhere to strict gender roles while others are more egalitarian.

**How can gender roles promote development? –**

- A society in which women have rights and access to opportunities provides an environment for the expansion of capabilities (i.e ability to read/write, have a long and healthy life, earn a respectable living and take part in decision-making)
- The most productive, and also most developed, states are the ones that mobilize the productive capacity of its entire population, regardless of gender.
- The contribution of the many roles that women can play in development cannot be disputed

**How can gender roles inhibit development? –**

- In some cultures, women are relegated to domestic tasks and child care. This effectively removes women from the work force and limits the overall productivity of society
- Discriminated against in terms of education, property, employment opportunities, economic freedom and empowerment
### Migration

Crossing the boundary of a political or administrative unit for a certain minimum period of time. This includes movements of refugees and uprooted displaced people as well as migrants. One of the main variables encompassing globalization

**How can migration promote development? –**

- Migration can bolster economic growth and the development of a recipient country simply due to the fact that it involves the transfer of skilled workforce as well as labor force, both of which are required to increase productivity and GDP.
	- Migrants often send remittances back to their home country, providing their family with necessary resources and paving the way for them to come out of poverty.
- Migration adds to the GDP and foreign exchange of both the recipient and home country

**How can migration inhibit development? –**

- Loss of human resource – both skilled and unskilled labor. Brain drain takes away the valuable human resource and country can exploit to its advantage. The presence of large number of immigrants sometimes leads to social unrest in the host country
- Low levels of development in the host country, as immigrants leave in an attempt to realize their potential as the prerequisites to live a desirable life are not present in the host country.
## Environmental factors

Safeguarding the environment and sustainable development are critical aspects of the discourse and practice of development goals in today’s world.

Climate change directly opposes sustainable development. Communities and countries are harming and overexploiting the very resources on which they depend for survival.

Such states do not have the resources/expertise to face this challenge as they try to move ahead on the path to growth,

**How can climate change inhibit development? –**

- Climate change and global warming are having a direct impact on weather and rainfall patterns. This results in floods, droughts, rising seawater levels, higher temperatures and other natural disasters that affect agricultural production.
- Disease, hunger and malnutrition are additional problems that the poor are likely to face as a result of this, bringing about added costs of healthcare and a fall in productivity of human resources
- Developing countries (and the poorest), will bear the brunt of climate change. Vulnerable areas include: sub-Saharan Africa (drying), Asian mega deltas (flooding), small islands and the Arctic region.

