# 1.6.2 Non-governmental organisations

**Definition –**  NGO is a private, non-commercial group or body which seeks to achieve its ends through non-violent means. It functions independently of any government. They serve a social or political goal such as humanitarian causes or the environment.

**Effective, Significant, Important –**

- NGOs raise awareness about different issues in the society
- NGOs advocate for and monitor policy
- NGos encourage political participation through provision of information
- NGOs use different strategies such as 'name and shame' to achieve desired outcomes, that can impact the soft power of states 
- NGOs bring issues to the attention of IGOs and other states
- NGOs cooperate with IGOs in humanitarian aid efforts

**NOT Effective, Significant, Important –**

- NGOs lack the different types of power that states have (for example : military power, economic power)
- NGOs depend on states and their willingness to cooperate (this could be interpreted as a confirmation of the Realist Theory, where states always have the final say, so state is the most important entity.
	- [[1.4 The evolving nature of state sovereignty#^79434c|International Rescue Commitee in Sudan (2009)]]
- NGOs are less effective in less democratic states due to the lack of free and fair elections which take away the power from the people and therefore the NGOs

## Amnesty International

**Function –**

- Advocates for rights worldwide, conducts research on human rights abuses, and campaigns to end human rights violations.

**Case Study: Raif Badawi's Case: AI's Advocacy for Free Speech and Human Rights in Saudi Arabia (something else might be umuch more relevant)** 
## Human Rights Watch

**Function –**

- international NGO that conducts research and advocacy on human rights issues worldwide
- investigates and exposes human rights abuses and promotes and protect human rights.
- monitors and reports on rights violations across the globe, and advocates for change at the national and international level

**Case study: HRW's Advocacy for the Rohingya**

## Greenpeace

**Function –**

- International NGO that promotes environmental activism and sustainability.
- Environmental issues, including climate change, deforestation, ocean pollution, and nuclear energy.

**Case Study: Greenpeace's campaign against Shell's Arctic drilling**
## International Committee of Red Cross (ICRC)

**Function –**

- Humanitarian assistance during armed conflicts.
- Its main functions include visiting prisoners of war, providing medical care, and protecting civilians during armed conflicts.
- Promote and uphold international humanitarian law.

**Case study – Haiti earthquake**
**Case study – Conflict in Darfur – Expulsion of IRC from Sudan**