# Liberalism

**Definition –** Liberalism is a political ideology that emphasizes the importance of individual rights, freedom, and democracy, and advocates for a limited government that is accountable to the people

**Classical liberalism –**

- Key thinkers: John Locke and Immanuel Kant
- Importance of individual rights, the social contract, and the rule of law
- States should be founded on the consent of the governed, and they have certain inalienable rights that must be protected
- The democratic peace theory  - democracies less likely to go to war, as they share common values and institutions

**Neoliberalism –**

- Key thinkers: Robert Keohane and Joseph Nye  
- Importance of international institutions, cooperation, and interdependence
- States achieve their interests through cooperation and participation in international institutions
- International institutions facilitate cooperation by setting rules that promote peaceful behavior
- Soft power is an important tool in international politics

**Key principles of liberalism –**

- Societies and states have become so interdependent by the end of 20th century that, according to liberalism, the way they relate to each other changed in fundamental ways.
- Interdependence: The idea that states and their fortunes are connected to each other.  
	- What happens in one state can have effects on another state.  
	- Relations between two states can greatly affect the relations between other states.
- Liberalism suggests a particular kind of interdependence - **Complex Interdependence**

**Three components of complex interdependence –**

- Multiple channel
- Multiple issues
- Decline in use and effectiveness of military force

### Three components of complex interdependence
#### Multilple channels

Realism sees states as only significant actors – so global politics is confined to state-to-state relations. On the other side, Liberalism does not deny importance of state-to-state relations, but it proposes that states are not the only important actors in global politics  
 
**Non-state actors –**  

- Transnational corporations (TNCs) e.g McDonalds, Apple  
- Non-governmental organisations (NGOs) e.g. Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch  
- Inter-governmental organisations e.g. United Nations (UN), European Union (EU)  

According to Liberalism, these are all important international connections across state boundarie

**Sub-state actors also make up multiple channels in a complex, interdependent world –**

- Non-multinational business that buy imported goods from abroad  
- Provincial governments  
- Individuals – who travel abroad or may have friendships with individuals in other countries

Liberalism sees a complex web of connections across the globe. Focusing on only state-to-state relations misses an important part of global politics:  
* States are not the only actors to have interests that drive their actions.  
* Non-state actors have own goals and interests that may different to those of the state.

#### Multiple issues

- States are not only interested in military security.  
- Economic, ideological, religious and cultural issues are part of the global agenda  
- Even issues that realists would see as purely domestic can have an effect on the global system:  E.g. Environmental regulations may be adopted by a state to protect its own  citizens but may affect trading partners if imports must meet new regulations  
- Therefore, domestic policy can become foreign policy as a result of connections between issues, channels and interdependence between actors

#### Decline in use and effectiveness of military force

Complex interdependence means military force is not as effective or frequently used as in the past: 

- Many issues of concern to states and non-state actors do not lend themselves to military  action – For example, climate change.  
- No sense in state conquering trading partner through military force to address a trade  imbalance – would destroy economic export market.  
- Complete interdependence means states are constrained in use of military power because this power only harms multiple interests of states and other actors. The three components of complex interdependence lead liberalism to expect much more cooperation in global politics than realism does.

## Comparing liberalism and realism

- Liberals do not deny the existence of conflict but argue cooperation is the norm.  
- States trade peacefully; sign non-aggression pacts; share military responsibilities  
- Some states have small/no militaries  
- Some centuries old military rivalries have been transformed into military/economic partnerships  

If the world is so anarchic and dangerous, then why do states cooperate? States cooperate because it is in their interests to do so..

#### Justifying the liberal perspective

- States realize that hostile actions can harm their interests as much as those of any potential rival.  
- The multiple channels that connect non-state actors constrain states.  
- Even if leaders recognize security threats and want to employ conflictual means, they often face resistance from public or powerful interest groups.

#### The relationship between liberalism and democracy

In democracies, where opposition is legal and citizens can hold their leaders to account, multiple channels are more likely to constrain leaders from conflict.  
→ Key point: According to liberal theory, the effects of complex interdependence will be  
more significant in a more democratic world


==Add on democratic peace thesis==